---
title: $ tar -zxvf mongodb-linux-*-4.0.5.tgz
layout: post
date: '2018-12-23'
---

The first command comes from this [MongoDB installation tutorial](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/install-mongodb-on-ubuntu-tarball/)

```tar -zxvf mongodb-linux-*-4.0.5.tgz```

Commands using the utility `tar`, like this one, are ubiquitous in installation instructions for linux programs.

Let's take it apart. First, a definition:

```tar is a computer software utility for collecting many files into one archive file.```[[^1]]

Interestingly, `.tar` files themselves are not compressed by default. [[^2]] However, it is very common to compress them using a utility like `gzip` (GNU Zip), one of the standard Unix Compression Programs (Ward, How Linux Works, Section 2.18.1).
In the case above, we see a file `mongodb-linux-*-4.0.5` with the extension `.tgz`.
This means that a collection of files has first been bundled into a single file using tar and then compressed using `gzip`. Note: `gzip` cannot compress multiple files!.

The bundling process may have looked something like the following

```tar cf mongodb-osx-ssl-x86_64-4.0.5.tar fileOneToBundle fileOneToBundle...```

Here the `c` flag indicates that we want to `create` a tar archive, and the `f` flag indicates that the next parameter will be the name of the archive file for `tar` to create.

Once the folks at Mongo created `mongodb-osx-ssl-x86_64-4.0.5.tar`, 

they gzipped it to compress it.
This may have looked like.

```gzip mongodb-osx-ssl-x86_64-4.0.5.tar```

This command compresses the file and gives it the extension 
`.tar.gz`

The extension can than be manually shorted to 
`.tgz`

>Question: Is there a way to shorten this programmatically?

Cool! So now we know how we got the file. Let's get back to the original command.

```tar -zxvf mongodb-linux-*-4.0.5.tgz```

Let's examine each flag

`-z`: put the archive through `gzip`. Because tarballs are so often gzipped, you can un-compress a file by simply passing a flag to `tar`. Yes! That means that the separate invocation of `gzip` above was unnecessary!

`x`: puts tar into extract, or unpack mode

`v`: enable verbose output (`tar` will print the names of the files as it unpacks them)

`f`: the file flag (tells tar that the next parameter is the file name of the archive or STDOUT if `f` if followed by `-`.) [3](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/1280/what-does-the-f-parameter-do-in-the-tar-command)

---
Footnote:

[^1]: 1: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tar_(computing)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tar_(computing))!

[^2]: 2: [https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/127169/does-tar-actually-compress-files-or-just-group-them-together](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/127169/does-tar-actually-compress-files-or-just-group-them-together)
